FACT SHEET - PROPERTY AND BUILDING

Building Inspections
Please ensure stamped consented plans
and documents are on site for inspections.
What are Building Inspections?
Building inspections are to check at key stages of
the build that the work is being constructed and the
materials used are as approved in the consent plans
and comply with the Building Code.

The different types of inspection
Foundations
A foundation inspection – for a farm building is
likely for the post holes, for other buildings it is a
foundation/slab or a pile and ring foundation.
The inspection is done before the concrete is poured
so it can be confirmed that the building is going to be
sited as planned, and floor height is correct.
We also check steel reinforcing, polythene or DPC and
punch pads are in place and the trenches and holes are
clear of debris.
Slab inspection and structural concrete
These generally follow the foundation inspection
and check similar things as the foundation - steel
reinforcing, DPC and control joints.
Retaining walls
The inspection is required before the wall is back-filled
so that waterproof membranes and subsoil drainage
can be seen.

Drainage
All drains should be inspected for the correct size, fall,
venting and bedding material before they are backfilled. Underfloor waste drains should be checked
before the slab is poured over the top. Obviously it is
very important not to miss this inspection.
NOTE: The Council will require an as-built drainage plan.

Structure
Structure inspections are where a check is made that
the timber is to the specified grade and treatment.
Timber/steel sizes, spans and fixing of studs, beams,
joists, rafters, trusses and purlins are checked – before
any building wrap is installed. This is where bracing
straps and rafter/truss fixings can be seen.
Cladding
During the cladding inspection, our inspectors will
check that the consented cladding is being installed
as per the specific manufacturer’s installation.
Mid-height veneer
This is one of the cladding inspections and it is done
when the bricks are partially laid. The brick ties, fixings
and weep holes are checked and the cavity is confirmed
to be as designed and clear of mortar and debris.
Please turn over

220718121706 - QD BU Information 006 - Version 2 - September 2025

Building inspections are not a substitute for building
quality control or a clerk of works. The building code
is the minimum requirement set by regulation and the
Council and inspector cannot enforce a higher standard.

Preline

Swimming pool

This is done before the internal linings are installed and
the walls are enclosed. Moisture content of the framing
is checked, as well as the insulation, bracing layout,
lintels and fixings.

Pools must comply with The Building (Pools)
Amendment Act 2016, which is Subpart 7A of the
Building Act 2004 and with New Zealand Building
Code clause F9. These incorporate child safety
provisions for residential swimming pools.

A plumbing inspection will also occur at this stage so
that pipework can be seen.

Barriers must be in place, any doors and windows
opening into the pool area will be checked for
compliance and a backflow preventer must be installed
so that pool water cannot flow back into the water
supply and contaminate it.
Specialist inspections
These are carried out by specialists such as engineers,
and will usually be covered by producer statements.
See the specialist inspection fact sheet.

Application for Code Compliance Certificate
On the completion of the building work the owner must
complete a Form 6 Application for Code Compliance
Certificate and submit to the Council along with any
applicable records of work, electrical certificates, gas
certificates, producers statements and warranties.

Prestop
This is where bracing panels, wet area fixings and
fire lining fixings can be checked. It is important as
otherwise later inspection may require the removal
of plaster or paint work to confirm that correct
components are in the building.

A copy of the Form 6 Application for Code Compliance
Certificate can be downloaded from the Council
website waimakariri.govt.nz/building-services/buildingservices/building-consents/related-content/buildingapplication-forms-and-fact-sheets or a copy can also
be collected from a Council service centre.

Final inspection
This is the last inspection and should be done when
all work specified in the consent has been completed.
Here such things as safety barriers, hand rails, smoke
alarms, painting and sealing and landscaping to the
appropriate ground level can be confirmed.

Things you need to know

Commercial work will include fire and safety signage,
carpark marking, accessible access and any specified
systems are installed and checked.

Inspections are critical to your consent. It is important
to read your consent and know what inspections are
needed. A missed inspection can make it difficult to
gain the Code Compliance Certificate.

Heating unit inspections

Check with the Council to ensure you know the work
required for the inspection — before you book the
inspection so that you are not having to pay for a
failed inspection because the work was not ready.

Two inspections are required for in-builts – one is prior
to installation to check the condition of the chimney, to
ensure the inbuilt will be safe. The second inspection
is after the installation and will ensure that the fire is
installed as per the manufacturer’s specifications.

Always have the approved plans and documents on
site and available for the inspector.

A freestanding fire will have one inspection to confirm
the manufacturer’s specifications are met.
NOTE: The Council recommends the heating unit is not lit until the
Inspector has passed the Final Inspection and the Code Compliance
Certificate has been issued.

Find out more at waimakariri.govt.nz or contact Customer Services on 0800 965 468.

220718121706 – September 2025
QD BU Information 006 - Version 2

2

Waimakariri District Council
Building Inspections

