FACT SHEET - PROPERTY AND BUILDING

Building Location
Certificates
Once you receive a Building Consent, you may be required to provide a Building
Location Certificate (BLC) or Setout Certificate from a Registered Professional
Surveyor or Licensed Cadastral Surveyor. These can be for the Building Code
and District Plan compliance of finished floor levels (FFL), recession planes, or
boundary setbacks.
In some cases a BLC for FFL may not be
necessary, such as when:
1. The Site and Level Plan for the Building Consent has
been clearly identified as being provided by a Registered
Professional Surveyor or Licensed Cadastral Surveyor; and
2. The proposed FFL is at least 300mm above the required
minimum floor level. The proposed FFL must be set out
from the specific benchmarks established as part of
the subdivision or from a LINZ 1st or 2nd order vertical
geodetic mark and not other features (eg manhole lid,
sump grates, etc); and

4. Reference is made back to the New Zealand Vertical
Datum 2016 (NZVD2016) or Lyttelton Vertical Datum
1937 (LVD1937) depending on District Plan and
Resource Consent requirements; and
5. Sufficient internal and external spot levels are
shown within Site and Level Plan to facilitate simple
verification of the proposed floor level, in relation
to these existing levels for both the Builder and the
Building Inspector; and
6. A Licensed Building Practitioner (LBP) shall sign the
endorsed site plan as confirmation the slab has been
constructed no lower than FFL approved in the Building
Consent. A stamp will be created and applied to
documents by the BCA for signing.

A BLC for recession plane and setback may
not be necessary when:
1. The plans clearly show at least 200mm clearance from
the required recession plane.
2. The external walls are detailed at least 200mm clear
of the 1 metre minimum for the control of external
fire spread.
3. The external wall is fire rated.

If the surveyor identifies differences from the approved
building consent plans on the building location
certificate, the Council will need to be contacted as this
means a change to the approved building consent plans
that may require an amendment to both the building
consent and/or resource consent if one was granted, or
application for a new resource consent.

Find out more at waimakariri.govt.nz, or contact Customer Services on 0800 965 468.

230518072156 / QD BU Information 014 - Version 1 - May 2023

3. A minimum of two established benchmarks (specific
subdivision benchmarks or LINZ marks) shall be
referenced with the first to set out the levels and the
second to close the circuit; and

