FACT SHEET - PROPERTY AND BUILDING

Certificate of Acceptance
A Certificate of Acceptance (COA) may be issued by the Council for work that
required a building consent but was completed without one. The building work
must comply with the Building Code.
What is a COA?
A Certificate of Acceptance (COA) included in the
New Zealand Building Act 2004 is an official document
issued by a Council (territorial authority) to confirm
whether building work carried out without a building
consent, complies with the NZ Building Code. A COA
is not the same as a building consent with an issued
Code Compliance Certificate, but it does provide legal
recognition for unconsented building work.

When might I need a COA?

Under Schedule 1 of the Building Act some building
work is exempt from needing Building Consent.
Council therefore has no basis to issue a COA for that
work. Exempt work must still meet the Building Code
under Section 17 of the Building Act 2004.

How much do they cost?
Fees are payable as described in Section 97 of the
Building Act 2004. Council costs associated with the
processing of a COA application, need to be paid in full
before the COA can be issued. There may still be fees
payable if the application is refused. The deposit is
non-refundable, and there are likely to be fees payable
in addition to the deposit amount.
Please refer to the Council’s Fees and Charges
Schedule available online via waimakariri.govt.nz

How do I apply for a COA?

What should be included in my COA application?

The Council’s Certificate of Acceptance Application
Form (Form 8) is available online via waimakariri.govt.nz

The Council’s Certificate of Acceptance Application
Form (Form 8) includes a checklist which sets out
documents that applicants must attach to their
COA application.

Alternatively, a hard copy form can be obtained from a
Waimakariri District Council Service Centre.

Continued over page

waimakariri.govt.nz

200909119295 – QD BU Information 008 – Version 2 – December 2025

A COA may be applied for when work that required
a building consent is carried out without a building
consent. An application for a COA does not cancel
Section 40 of the Building Act 2004 whereby a person
must not carry out building work except in accordance
with a building consent.

Is a Council inspection required?
A Council Compliance Officer will inspect the building
work covered by the COA application. Where there has
been invasive testing carried out, these areas should
be left exposed so that the Council is able to observe
the level of compliance being claimed.

Will my COA be issued by the Council?
Territorial authorities are under no obligation to issue
a COA. A territorial authority may, on application, issue
a Certificate of Acceptance for work that has already
been carried out without a building consent. This does
not apply to building work carried out prior to 1 July
1992. To issue a COA, the territorial authority must be
satisfied, to the best of its knowledge and belief and on
reasonable grounds, that, insofar as it could ascertain,
the building work complies with the Building Code.
The Council may refuse to issue a COA. If the building
work is not considered dangerous or insanitary, the
Council may acknowledge on the property file that
unconsented building work has been carried out on
the property and that a COA has been refused. This
information will be made available on future LIMs for
the property.

Questions?
Not sure whether you’ve got it right? We are here
to help. Give us a call on 0800 965 468 or email
buildinginfo@wmk.govt.nz
It may be useful to have a Compliance Officer visit your
property before a COA application is made. This can be
discussed when you contact us.

Disclaimer
This document is for information purposes only and
should not be relied upon as a substitute for the Building
Act, the Building Code, or any associated regulations.

Find out more at waimakariri.govt.nz, or contact Customer Services on 0800 965 468.

200909119295 – December 2025
QD BU Information 008 - Version 2

2

Waimakariri District Council Certificate of
Acceptance Fact Sheet

