FACT SHEET - PROPERTY AND BUILDING

Building Change of Use
If you’re thinking about changing the use of a building into temporary
or permanent accommodation, you need to make sure you follow the
requirements of the Building Act 2004.
The Waimakariri District Council is receiving an
increasing number of complaints relating to people
living in a building not consented or approved for
habitable use as permanent occupation. Common
examples include, but are not limited to, converted
shipping containers, free-standing garages, and the
conversion of farm buildings, typically implement
sheds and workshops.

What does the Building Act say and allow for?
Building work is defined as work for, or in connection
with, the construction, alteration, demolition or removal
of a building, including siteworks.

Can I live in a caravan or house bus on
my property?
A caravan, house bus or similar vehicle must be
roadworthy (meaning carrying current certificate (or
warrent) of fitness and registration) at all times for it to
be used on a property, and then it should be used
for the purpose it was designed.
Any vehicle that is not roadworthy may be considered
to be a permanent structure, and would not comply with
the requirements of the Building Act 2004 for living
accommodation.
Section BL.8(1)(a) “Meaning of Building” describes a
building as follows:
“means a temporary or permanent movable or immovable
structure (including a structure intended for occupation by
people, animals, machinery or chattels); and

A vehicle, or motor vehicle (including a vehicle or motor
vehicle as defined in section 2(1) of the Land Transport
Act 1998) that is immovable and is occupied by people
on a permanent or long-term basis” (section 8(1)(b)(iii).”
Section 2(1) of the Land Transport Act 1998 describes a
motor vehicle as:
“ a. Means a vehicle drawn or propelled by mechanical
power; and
b. Includes a trailer, but
c. Does not include i. A vehicle running on rails, or
ii. An invalid carriage, or
iii. A trailer (other than a trailer designed solely for
the carriage of goods) that is designed and used
exclusively as part of an armament of the New
Zealand Defence Force.”
Once a caravan/motor home and the like is connected
to services (power, water, effluent), or the wheels
removed/placed on piles, then it becomes a building.

Change of building use - what it means
An owner of a building must give written notice to the
Council if they propose to change the use of a building.
The Council in turn will provide the owner with written
notice if it is satisfied that the building in its new use

Note: The Building Act requires you to notify the Council of a change
of use, and approval must be given before the project commences.
Please turn over

200909119430 - QD BU Information 009 - Version 1 - November 2022

Change of use

• means of escape from fire, protection of other
property, sanitary facilities, structural performance
and fire rating
• access and facilities for people with disabilities.
and must also comply with the other provisions of the
Building Code to at least the same extent as before
the change of use.
It is very important to be aware that if the change of
use of the building results in the creation of household

unit(s) where these did not previously exist, the building
must then comply as nearly as reasonable practicable
with the Building Code in all aspects.

Are there any exceptions?
In exceptional circumstances permission may be
granted to live in temporary accommodation, if an
approved and consented effluent disposal system has
been installed, and potable water is available on site.
The Environmental Services Unit is available to
discuss options available on a case-by-case basis.
Please phone the Environmental Services Unit’s
Environmental Health Officer.

Find out more at waimakariri.govt.nz, or contact Customer Services on 0800 965 468.

200909119430 - QD BU Information 009 - Version 1 - November 2022

complies with the other provisions in the Building
Code relating to:

