Let’s Get it Right

Building Consents
Your guide to the building consent process

This is intended as a guide only to help you through the
building consent process

1

Do you need a building consent? . .................................................... 2

2

Apply for a PIM . ................................................................................... 2

3

Complete the consent application ................................................... 3

4

Lodge the consent application . ........................................................ 3

5

Application assessment . .................................................................... 4

6

Application validation . ....................................................................... 4

7

Advise if consent granted . ................................................................ 5

8

Pay the balance of fees ...................................................................... 5

9

Plan changes ......................................................................................... 5

10

Arrange inspections ............................................................................ 6

11

Plans/documents available for inspector ....................................... 7

12

Verify compliance with consent documents .................................. 7

13

Read inspection notice before continuing . .................................... 7

14

Extend the consent if work not started . ........................................ 8

15

Book and Pass a Final Inspection . ................................................... 8

16

Apply for Code Compliance Certificate . ......................................... 9

17

Code Compliance Certificate Audit .................................................. 9

What’s in this guide?

STEPS FOR PLANNING TO BUILD
Steps you must take
Steps for you to consider
Steps the Council must take

What is a building consent?
A building consent is a legal document certifying approval of your proposed
building work issued by your Council, and means that the Council is satisfied on
reasonable grounds that the proposed work complies with the requirements of
the New Zealand Building Act 2004, Building Regulations and Building Code.
Application for a Building Consent can be carried out for you by a builder or
designer who acts as your designated agent. All correspondence and enquiries
will be directed to your agent. You, as owner, will be responsible for ensuring that
the application complies with all Council and Building Act 2004 requirements. You
will also be responsible for all fees and levies associated with the application.

Restricted building work
Restricted Building Work applies to most residential building or renovation work and
only a Licensed Building Practitioner (LBP) can undertake or supervise the work.
If you apply for a building consent, you must make sure the practitioners you use
are correctly licensed to carry out the work. Licensed Building Practitioners include:
• Designers
• Carpenters
• Foundation specialists

• Roofers
• Bricklayers and blocklayers
• External plasterers.

Professional engineers, architects, plumbers and gasfitters are treated as
Licensed Building Practitioners and can carry out some Restricted Building
Work. Visit lbp.govt.nz for more information on who can carry out restricted
building work.
Not all work that requires a building consent is Restricted Building Work. You
will find information on the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment
(MBIE) website on Restricted Building Work.
Waimakariri District Council | 210616096929

1

Owner-builder exemption
Owner-builders are able to carry out Restricted Building Work on their own
home. Before you can use the owner-builder exemption you need to complete a
Statutory declaration as to owner-builder status form showing that you meet
the owner-builder criteria.
The statutory declaration form has to be witnessed and signed by a Justice of
the Peace or someone else authorised by law to do so. This form needs to be
given to your local council with your application for a building consent, or before
the construction of Restricted Building Work on your home starts.

The paperwork – before the project can begin
Step 1 - Do you need a building consent?
Who does it?

When?

You or your agent (designer/builder)

Before you start building

•

You can’t start any physical work until a Building Consent has been issued. Fines apply if you do.

•

You may also need a Resource Consent if your project lies outside the requirements of the
District or Regional Plan. Check with the Council.

•

A comprehensive list of building work that does not require a building consent (Schedule 1,
Building Act 2004) can be obtained from building.govt.nz

Step 2 - Apply for a PIM (Project Information Memorandum)

2

Who does it?

When?

You or your agent (designer/builder)

Before or concurrently with applying for
a Building Consent

•

A PIM report includes information relevant to your proposed building work such as wind
and snow zones, flooding and non-compliance with the District Plan. While a PIM is not
mandatory, if you don’t get a PIM beforehand, the Council will carry out a compliance and
service check to ensure District Plan compliance.

•

If the Council considers that Regional or District Plan compliance is materially affected by
the work involved in the Building Consent, they are obliged to issue a notice (section 37 of
the Building Act 2004) that the work requires a Resource Consent. This may halt all building
work, or only allow it to proceed to a certain stage prior to a Resource Consent being issued.

Let’s Get It Right Building Consents, Version 3 - December 2023

Step 3 - Complete the appropriate consent application form
Who does it?

When?

You or your agent (designer/builder)

Before lodging a Building Consent

•

You can get the appropriate application forms from a Council Service Centre or download
from waimakariri.govt.nz

•

Application forms with incomplete information or that are incorrectly filled in will cause your
application to be rejected and you will then have to re-apply with complete/correct information.

•

Check with your Council whether you will need a Compliance Schedule (relating to safety
features in the project). Typically, but not always, this will be relevant to a commercial
building project. You will also need to provide performance standards for the inspection,
maintenance and reporting procedures for the safety feature.

Step 4 - Lodge the Consent Application Form
Who does it?

When?

You or your
agent

Only when you are certain the application is correctly filled in
and all necessary supporting information has been provided. If
the application is incomplete or incorrect, this will cause your
application to be rejected and you will have to re-apply with
complete/correct information

•

For a comprehensive schedule of fees visit waimakariri.govt.nz

•

Whether a deposit or the full fee is required to be paid at the time of lodgement will be
determined by the Schedule of Fees.

•

Applications can be lodged at the Council’s Rangiora Service Centre or online via the
Council portal (Please note: You must be registered to use the online service). Applications
will be vetted by Council staff to ensure completeness.

•

Note that you will need to show how compliance with the Building Code will be achieved.

•

A Producer Statement may be required for certain work within the project (e.g. in the design
or after construction). A Producer Statement may be used as supporting evidence from the
contractor that work completed is in accordance with the approved building consent. The
Producer Statement is signed by a registered engineer, design professional or builder.

•

In the case of a standardised building design, which is intended to be replicated several
times (e.g. identical units within a block) a multi proof approval may be used in the consent
process. This precludes the need for the same or similar building designs to be assessed
repeatedly for Building Code compliance.

Waimakariri District Council | 210616096929

3

Step 5 - Application Assessment
Who does it?

When?

Your Council

After the application is lodged

•

Your Council has up to 20 working days to process the application unless it is a multi proof
consent which must be processed within 10 working days.

•

The Council may employ other specialists (e.g. engineers) to carry out peer reviews of
elements of the application.

•

A Building Consent Officer will ensure that your plans and specifications show sufficient
detail and that they comply with the Building Code in the form of:
» An acceptable solution and/or verification method
» A determination
» A current national multi use approval
» A current product certificate
» Alternative solution.

•

If your plans are not compliant with the Building Code or further detail is required, you
will be sent a Request for Further Information (RFI). The 20 day processing period is then
suspended until the requested information is received.

•

The number and type of inspections required for your building work will be determined at
this time. You will be advised of these when your Consent is granted by way of a Schedule
of Inspections.

•

If a third party is required to carry out some inspections, these will be included in the Schedule
of Inspections. Please note it is the applicant/agents responsibility to arrange these.

•

The amount of time taken for your consent to be processed is reliant on the quality and
completeness of the documentation/information.

•

You can amend your application at any time during processing prior to granting by supplying
documentation as applicable to the consenting officer, this will be treated as further information.

•

The need for a Compliance Schedule will be determined in the assessment of the application.

Step 6 - Application Validation

4

Who does it?

When?

Your Council
(Senior Building Officer)

When the Building Officer is satisfied your application
is fully compliant with the Building Code

•

This is a quality assurance check used to certify that the relevant documentation
accurately represents how compliance will be achieved.

•

Please note: Not all jobs require validation, this will be determined at the time the consent
is allocated to a Building Consent Officer.

Let’s Get It Right Building Consents, Version 3 - December 2023

Step 7 - Advice of Granted Consent
Who does it?

When?

Your Council

As soon as the consent is granted

•

A Building Consent Authority must grant a building consent if it is satisfied on reasonable
grounds that the provisions of the building code would be met if the building work were properly
completed in accordance with the plans and specifications that accompanied the application.

•

The Council will write to you to advise that your Building Consent is to be granted and of
any outstanding balance to be paid – you will be sent an invoice for that amount.

•

On granting the consent the Council will also advise you of what inspections are necessary
throughout the construction. It will be your responsibility to arrange these inspections. See
Steps 10 and 11.

Step 8 - Pay the Balance of Fees
Who does it?

When?

You or your agent

When you receive advice from the Council that the Building
Consent is to be granted

•

The fees must be paid in full before any Building Consent is issued.

•

If building work has not started within 12 months of the date of issue of the Consent, the
Consent lapses and you will need to re-apply. See Step 14.

•

If you need to change your plans after the Consent is granted, the changes will need written
approval from the Owner and the Designer. You will also need approval from Council. See Step 9.

Step 9 - Plan Changes after Building Consent is issued
(Minor Variation/Amendment)
Who does it?

When?

You or your agent

After Building Consent is issued

•

You can apply for a minor variation or an amendment to the building consent after it has
been granted. All amendments must comply with all requirements of the Building Code and
Building Act 2004. See building.govt.nz for details.

•

To apply for an in-office minor variation, you will need to complete the Application for a Minor
Variation to a Building Consent form and provide the updated plans/documents to the Building
Unit to be assessed. Inspectors can approve some minor variations onsite. To be accepted
onsite, you will need to provide the inspector with enough information to show how the
variation complies with the Building Code.
Waimakariri District Council | 210616096929

5

•

If a major change (e.g. a change of exterior cladding), you will need to apply for an
Amendment by completing an Application for a Building Consent (Form 2) and providing
the associated plans and specifications.

•

Some changes (e.g. change to bulk or location) may require assessment for compliance
with the District Plan and/or Regional Plan.

•

Council has 20 working days to process an Amendment. If your plans are not compliant
with the Building Code or further detail is required, you will be sent a Request for Further
Information (RFI). The 20 day processing period is then suspended until the requested
information is received.

The Construction
Inspections throughout the construction process verify that the project is being
constructed in accordance with your consent plans and specifications.

Step 10 - Inspection of Work

6

Who does it?

When?

You or your agent

At least 2-3 full working days before you need the inspection
- please note: it may not always be possible to carry out the
inspection within the time frame you require.

•

The schedule of inspections can be found in your approved Consent documents.

•

A standard inspection schedule may include inspections of foundations/siting, slab,
drainage, pre-roof structure, roof membrane, half height brick and others. For a
comprehensive list of possible inspections see waimakariri.govt.nz

•

To arrange an inspection contact the building unit either by phone on 03 311 8906, or by
email at bcbooking@wmk.govt.nz

•

The Council will ask for your Building Consent number (this acts as a reference number
throughout your project).

•

Inspection bookings cannot be made for specific times due to the variable durations of
previous inspections.

•

Inspections cannot be made until the Building Consent is paid for.

•

A third party (e.g. engineer) inspection included in the Inspection Schedule needs to be
arranged by you.

•

A building inspector may refuse to enter your site if he/she considers it unsafe to do so.

Let’s Get It Right Building Consents, Version 3 - December 2023

Step 11 - Have Plans and Documents Available for Inspector
Who does it?

When?

You or your agent

At the time of inspection

•

Wherever possible you should have someone on site to meet the inspector.

•

It may also be necessary for you to provide access to some parts of the building for
inspection purposes.

•

Complete approved consent documentation to be on-site, including plans and
specifications and any approved amendments. All documentation to be kept in clean and
tidy condition and in order.

Step 12 - Verify Compliance with Consent Documents
Who does it?

When?

The Council’s Building Inspector

At the time of the inspection

•

If the work does not comply with the Consent documents, you may amend the documents
accordingly subject to the approval of the inspector.

•

Some minor variations can be addressed by the inspector but more significant changes (e.g.
a change of exterior cladding) must be lodged with the Council for approval (amendment).

•

All building work must comply with the approved building consent.

•

Any deviations from the consent documents will require Council approval. If the change is
considered ‘minor’, then a minor variation may be appropriate and may be addressed onsite by the inspector.

Step 13a - Read the Inspection Notice Before Continuing Work (PASS)
Who does it?

When?

You or your agent

At the completion of the inspection

•

The inspection notice will tell you what was inspected and whether the building work has
passed or failed the inspection.

•

The building work may be passed subject to minor work being completed.

•

If the building work has passed the inspection, you may continue work on the project.

Waimakariri District Council | 210616096929

7

Step 13b - Read the Inspection Notice Before Continuing Work (FAIL)
Who does it?

When?

You or your agent

At the completion of the inspection

•

The inspection notice will tell you what was inspected and whether the building work has
passed or failed the inspection.

•

If the building work has failed the inspection, you will need to complete the work in accordance
with the Consent documents and inspection notice before booking another inspection.

•

If the inspection determines that the building work has serious deficiencies, a Notice To Fix
(NTF) may be issued. This means that you must cease work immediately and attend to the
issue(s) raised in the NTF. Not to do so is an offence under the Building Act 2004.

Step 14 - Extend the Consent if work not started
prior to 12 months from date of issue
Who does it?

When?

You or your agent

Prior to the expiry of 12 months from the date of issue

•

If you intend to continue with the project and building work won’t start within 12 months
of the date of issue, you will need to apply for a work start extension. A fee applies for
this service.

•

If building work has not started within 12 months of the date of issue of the Consent, and
we have not received a request for a work start extension, then the Consent lapses and
you will need to apply for a new Building Consent.

The work is complete, what now?
Step 15 - Book and Pass a Final Inspection

8

Who does it?

When?

You or your agent

The inspection should be carried out on completion of the
project. As with previous inspections you will need to book at
least two days in advance

•

Contact Council to book a final inspection.

•

After your final inspection has been passed your file is sent to the Council’s Code
Compliance Auditor.

Let’s Get It Right Building Consents, Version 3 - December 2023

•

Final inspection is intended to ensure all work completed under the Building Consent
complies with the Consent documents.

Step 16 - Apply for a Code Compliance Certificate (Form 6)
Who does it?

When?

You or your agent

An owner must apply for a Code of Compliance (CCC ) after all
building work to be carried out under a building consent to that
owner is completed

•

A Code Compliance Certificate confirms that the Council considers that the work complies
with the Building Consent.

•

The application must be made to the Council as soon as practicable after the building work is
completed and in the prescribed form. If applicable, the owner must include any records of work
provided by an LBP and where applicable any energy work certificates.

•

The Application for Code Compliance Certificate (Form 6) is available from the Council and
downloadable from waimakariri.govt.nz. A copy is provided with the consent documentation.
Your building inspector also normally carries a supply of the forms.

•

Any fees for Development Contributions, additional inspections or amendment processing
time due will need to be paid prior to the issue of the Code Compliance Certificate.

•

If a specified system is included in the project, verification of compliance with this is
needed prior to the issue of a Code Compliance Certificate (e.g. in the case of a fire alarm).

Step 17 - Verify Compliance with Consent Documents
Who does it?

When?

Your Council

At the time of the inspection

•

All inspections, related documentation and on-site photos are checked for completeness
and compliance with the Consent.

•

If outstanding items are found, you may be requested by the Council’s Code Compliance
Auditor to supply additional information or carry out additional works.

•

A Code Compliance Certificate cannot be issued until all of the outstanding issues are resolved.

•

The Council has 20 working days to issue a Code Compliance Certificate. This does not include
any outstanding issues to be addressed e.g. clock suspended.

•

Your Code Compliance Certificate is placed on your Council property file for inclusion in
any future Land Information Memorandum (LIM).
Waimakariri District Council | 210616096929

9

Glossary
These are some of the terms that you
are likely to encounter in the process
of applying for and being granted
a Building Consent. This is not an
exhaustive list of building terms – for
a more comprehensive selection of
building terms you should refer to
the ‘Glossary of Building Terms’
(NZMP 4212:1998) available for
purchase from Standards New Zealand.

A
Acceptable Solutions and
Verification Methods
Documents published by the Ministry of
Building, Innovation and Employment
(MBIE). They comprise Acceptable Solutions
and Verification Methods which provide
methods of compliance with the Building
Code. Although optional, these documents
are commonly followed in domestic building
projects because they provide a straight
forward ‘recipe’ for building. (Previously
known as Compliance Documents).

Appraisal
An independent assessment of building
products, materials, systems or methods
of design or construction. Products are
assessed for Building Code compliance
and fitness for purpose.

10

B
Building
Any temporary or permanent, movable or
immovable structure, including a structure
intended for occupation by people,
animals, machinery or chattels.

Building Act 2004
An Act which aims to improve control
of, and encourage better practices in,
building design and construction, so that
buildings are designed and built right first
time. This will give greater assurance to
building owners and users, particularly
homeowners, that their building meets
standards set out in the Building Code.

Building Code
A set of national, mandatory standards for
building work, forming part of the Building
Regulations 1992. The New Zealand
Building Code is performance based – i.e.
it specifies the performance required of a
building rather than the particular materials,
methods etc. to be used in construction.

Building Consent
Consent issued by a Building Consent
Authority (BCA) for building work to begin
in accordance with the approved plans
and specifications.

Building Consent Authority (BCA)
Building Consent Authorities play a key role
in the building control process. Most city
and district councils are BCAs. BCAs issue
building consents, undertake inspections
during construction and issue code
compliance certificates, certifying that the
finished work complies with the Building
Code. They also issue Notices To Fix (NTFs)

Let’s Get It Right Building Consents, Version 3 - December 2023

and Compliance Schedules. BCAs charge a
fee for these services. The amount of that
fee depends on the BCA and the amount of
work involved, but is generally set for the
recovery of reasonable costs. It will be as
a proportion of the whole building project
to provide assurance that the job has been
done properly.

Compliance Schedule

Building Controls Process

Consent Notice

The system of consents, inspection and
certification of building work, aimed at
safeguarding the health and safety of
people using any building.

A document that lists the inspection,
maintenance and reporting procedures
for systems in a building (e.g. lifts, fire
alarms) to ensure their continued safety
of operation. For single residential
buildings, compliance schedules are only
required if there is a cable car.

A notice issued under the Resource
Management Act 1991 and recorded on
the Certificate of Title in respect of the
ongoing matters affecting the property
(e.g. geotechnical or stormwater disposal).

Building Work
The construction, alteration, demolition or
removal of a building. Building work also
includes sitework or work on an allotment
that is likely to affect the extent to which
an existing building on the land complies
with the Building Code.

D
Deposited Plan
Survey plan giving legal definition to
property boundaries.

District Plan

C
Certificate of Acceptance
A certificate issued by a Council in special
circumstances when a Code Compliance
Certificate cannot be issued, which
confirms that, to the extent to which an
inspection was able to be carried out, the
work complies with the Building Code.

Code Compliance Certificate (CCC)
A certificate issued by a Building Consent
Authority at the completion of building
work, confirming that the building work
under the Building Consent complies with
the approved plans and specifications at
the date of issue of CCC.

A document, generally consisting of maps,
policies and rules which sets out the
activities permitted on any land governed
by a District or City Council. It provides
the conditions under which activities
are permitted and lists which activities
require resource or planning consent.

E
Energy Work Certificate
A certificate given by a licensed plumber,
electrician or gas fitter when they have
finished, to verify the work has been done
in accordance with the relevant codes.

Waimakariri District Council | 210616096929

11

G
Geotechnical Report
A report prepared by a soils engineer,
setting out the geotechnical limitations
of a site in terms of soil stability, and
making recommendations to overcome
any limitations.

L
Licensed Building
Practitioner (LBP)
Certain types of work will need to be
undertaken or supervised by licensed
building practitioners.

M
Ministry of Building, Innovation
and Employment (MBIE)

replicated several times. They should also
lead to faster processing times at the local
level, reduced duplication for volume builders,
and lower consenting costs. A MultiProof is
not, and does not replace, a building consent.

N
New Zealand Building Code
The New Zealand Building Code sets
minimum performance standards that
buildings must comply with.

New Zealand Standards
Standards New Zealand provides a variety
of standards for the building industry,
covering issues such as construction,
testing, advice and manufacturing.

Notice to Fix (NTF)

The Ministry manages the system that
regulates building work and monitors its
effectiveness. This includes reviewing the
Building Code and producing documents
to show how to comply with it. The
Ministry also monitors the performance
of Building Consent Authorities (BCAs)
and District and City Councils, and can
investigate complaints.

A notice issued by a BCA, Council or
Regional Authority for breaches of the
Building Act or regulations (e.g. where
building work does not comply with the
Building Code). It specifies what remedial
work must be done and by when. It is an
offence to fail to comply with a Notice to
Fix, and a building owner can be fined up
to $200,000 plus a further $20,000 per
day as long as the offence continues.

MultiProof

P

A MultiProof is a statement by the
Ministry of Building, Innovation and
Employment that a specific set of building
plans and specifications complies with
the New Zealand Building Code. Under
the Building Act 2004 (as amended in 2009),
BCAs must accept a MultiProof as evidence
of Building Code compliance. MultiProofs
aim to deliver greater certainty of consenting
where standardised designs are being

12

Performance Requirement
A term in the Building Code used to describe,
either qualitatively or quantitatively, how
far the building work must go in meeting a
particular Building Code clause’s objectives
and functional requirements.

Let’s Get It Right Building Consents, Version 3 - December 2023

Plans and Specifications

Request for Information (RFI)

The documents according to which building
work is proposed to be constructed,
altered, demolished or removed. They
include proposed procedures for inspection
during construction alteration, demolition
or removal.

A notice asking for more information.

Producer Statement
A statement confirming that plans,
specifications or completed works comply
with the technical requirements to satisfy
the Building Code. A Producer Statement
will usually be issued by a recognised
specialist (e.g. engineer, architect,
appraisal organisation or competent
contractor). It is up to the Building
Consent Authority to decide whether to
rely on such a statement.

Project Information
Memorandum (PIM)
A report, issued by the local Council prior
to issuing a Building Consent, confirming
that building work may proceed, subject
to any requirements under legislation
other than the Building Act. It may also
notify that building work may not be done.
It includes information that the Council
considers to be relevant to the proposed
building work such as potential erosion,
subsidence, slippage and flooding.

R
Regional Plans
Prepared by Regional Councils to help
manage the resources for which they
are responsible.

Resource Consent
A land use consent, issued under the
Resource Management Act 1991, by the
local Council, for land use not designated
a permitted activity in the District Plan.

S
Sitework
Work on a building site, including
earthworks, preparatory to or associated
with the construction, alteration,
demolition or removal of a building.

Specific Design
Calculations and detailed drawings, usually
of an engineering nature, by persons with
appropriate technical expertise, relating to
a design solution specific to a particular
project. Specific designs may be supported
by a Producer Statement.

Specification
Detailed written instructions containing
details of work to be done and materials to
be used in the construction of a building.
See also Plans and Specifications.

V
Verification Method
A method by which building work may be
verified for compliance with the Building
Code. Verification Methods can include
calculations, laboratory tests or tests in
situ. Verification Methods are published
in the Ministry of Building, Innovation and
Employment’s Compliance Documents.

Waimakariri District Council | 210616096929

13

Private Bag 1005, Rangiora 7440
0800 965 468 (0800 WMK GOV)
03 313 4432
office@wmk.govt.nz
Service Centres:
Rangiora Service Centre
215 High Street, Rangiora - 0800 965 468
Kaiapoi Service Centre
176 Williams Street, Kaiapoi - 03 375 5009
Oxford Service Centre
34 Main Street, Oxford - 03 311 9005

Find out more at waimakariri.govt.nz

210616096929 / QD BU Guide 001 - Version 3 - December 2023

Waimakariri District Council

