FACT SHEET - PROPERTY AND BUILDING

Building on a Rural Site
Building on a rural site has its own unique challenges and some differences.
Some of these are mentioned below.
Effluent fields
You may need to provide site specific effluent field
design including fencing of the effluent field. It is
important to carefully plan where you position your
effluent field as this area will require some kind of
permanent fence.
Information regarding the fencing of effluent fields
can be found on the Council website under “Building
Services”, “Application Forms and Fact Sheets”.

A drainage consultant will assist in the design of the
sewer system and suitable discharge requirements
to comply with the Canterbury Land and Water
Regional Plan.
In addition, you may need approval from Environment
Canterbury Regional Council.

Stormwater
Depending on the location of your job, you may need
to provide a site specific stormwater design due to the
underlying soil permeability; some soils don’t support
a soak pit and you may be required to install swales or
ponds for your stormwater disposal or other specifically
designed systems. Council staff are able to advise you
about what is permissible for your site.
In some areas barns and sheds can be constructed
with no stormwater system if more than 10m away
from boundaries.

Potable water
Where a private well is installed, you will need to
provide full water test (chemical and microbiological)
results to Council to show you have a potable water
supply. This must be to the Waimakariri District Council
suite of test parameters. Water should be tested to
comply with the Drinking Water Standards for New
Zealand 2005 (Revised 2018).
Where the initial water test results show potable water
supply is present a second water (microbiological)
result needs to be provided to Council prior to issue
of the Code of Compliance Certificate or before
occupation occurs, whichever happens first.
If the water is not potable you will need to show how
the water will be treated to make it potable as part of
the building consent application.
Should you require treatment to make it potable
before you reside in the dwelling you will need to
supply Council a further full water test (chemical and
microbiological) to confirm the treatment system is
delivering potable water.
Please turn over

221114197261 – QD BU Information 007 – Version 1 – November 2022

As a means of calculating volume of discharge
when designing effluent disposal systems, what is
considered is the number of rooms in a dwelling
that could potentially be used as bedrooms.
Therefore rooms labelled as “study” or “office” may
be considered as bedrooms for the purposes of
effluent field design.

We recommend you carry out an annual microbiological
test to maintain the integrity of your supply.

Earthworks
It is also important to carefully consider earthworks
around your house – you must ensure a secondary flow
path for water run-off around your dwelling is maintained.

Floor level
The Finished Floor level will need to be designed for any
potential flooding hazards and ‘freeboard’ requirements
of the site.

Solid fuel burners
In most rural sites over two hectares you are allowed to
install most types of solid fuel burners, but check with
Environment Canterbury (ECan) to ensure your site is
one of these.

Second dwellings
You may be able to build a small dwelling on site to
live in while you are building the main house and you
may retain both as dwellings depending on the size of
the secondary dwelling. See the fact sheet “Secondary
Dwellings (granny flats)” for rules on this.
NB: In most cases it is not permissible to live
permanently in a caravan while you build your house.
Caravans are not intended for long term use, but may
be used as temporary accommodation while building
your house if not connected to services.

Multiple buildings

Garages
You will need to have vehicle access formed into the
garage for Code of Compliance Certificate.
You may need to apply for a vehicle crossing permit if
you wish to construct a new entrance/driveway.

Find out more at waimakariri.govt.nz, or contact Customer Services on 0800 965 468.

221114197261 – QD BU Information 007 – Version 1 – November 2022

You can apply to build multiple buildings on one title
as long as you meet the District Plan requirements
including structure coverage and boundary setbacks.

