FACT SHEET - PROPERTY AND BUILDING

Code Compliance
Certificate Checklist
After all building work under a building consent is completed, an application form
for Code Compliance Certificate must be submitted. The following outlines the
documentation you need to consider when submitting your application.
Step 1
Final inspection
Book in your final inspection to be carried out by a
Waimakariri District Council Inspector via 03 311 8906.

Step 2
Submit your Form 6 Application for Code Compliance

The final inspection notice will detail the
documentation required to be submitted.

Step 3

Solid Fuel Burner (Installers PS3)
Supplied by whoever installed the fire. If a wetback is
installed, a registered plumber/gasfitter will also need to
complete the form and supply their registration details.

Supply the below documentation as applicable to
your project:

Download forms from:

Electrical Certificate of Compliance and Electrical
Safety Certificate

waimakariri.govt.nz/ourapplicationforms

Supplied by registered electrician.

• Form 6 – Application for
Code Compliance Certificate

Plumbers Pressure Test

• PS3 Wet Area Seal-Tanking

Supplied by registered plumber.

• PS3 Septic Tank and Effluent Disposal field

Gas Certificate

building.govt.nz/assets/Uploads/projectsand-consents/restricted-building-work/
memorandum-record-of-building-work.pdf

Supplied by registered plumber/gasfitter.

• Form 6A - Memorandum – Record of Works

Please turn over

220315037170 - QD BU Information 004 - Version 2 - May 2025

To be filled out by owner or Code Compliance
Certificate applicant, making sure to complete the
build completion date on page 2, and sign and date the
application authorisation on page 4.

Record of Works

Potable Water Test

Completed by a Licensed Building Practitioner (LBP) as
applicable to any restricted building work e.g. cladding,
roofing, carpentry, etc.

This is for people using a private well or other system
as the sole means of providing a domestic water
supply to the building. For Code Compliance Certificate
we require a second water test, the first one being
required to gain consent. If the time elapsed between
the original test (for consent) and this second test is
greater than 18 months, or the results from the first test
were non-compliant, a full water test (Chemical and
Microbiological) will be required. If the original test is
less than 18 months old, only a microbiological test may
be required.

Engineers Site Notes and PS4
Where applicable relating to any specific engineered
aspect of the construction, unique to this project i.e.
foundations.
Wet Area Tanking Producer Statement
Relating to any tiling in wet areas, e.g. tiled shower, etc.,
to be supplied by tiler or tradesman specifying product
used and area/s applied to.

Refer to waimakariri.govt.nz/services/water-services/
water-supply

Septic Tank and Effluent Field Producer Statement

Please note: It is only necessary to supply the required
forms as in most cases not all of these will apply.

Relating to any pressurised wastewater treatment
system, e.g. E-One system, to be supplied by the
installer of the system.

This checklist represents the majority of what we may
require but not necessarily everything. After an audit
is carried out by our CCC Auditor, there may be further
information we ask you to supply.

Roofing Membrane Installation Producer Statement
and Warranty
Relating to installation of roofing membrane,
e.g. Butynol, to be supplied by installer.
Any Other Producer Statements
Any additional systems e.g. extra claddings, solar etc.

Find out more at waimakariri.govt.nz, or contact Customer Services on 0800 965 468.

220315037170 – May 2025
QD BU Information 004 - Version 2

2

Waimakariri District Council
Code Compliance Certificate Checklist

